20200303182151 - why ricardo won
================================



#keynes #ricardo #ideology

**The circular view of the economy obscures the origin of value**

The completeness of the Ricardian victory is some-  thing of a curiosity and a mystery. It must have been  due to a complex of suitabilities in the doctrine to the  environment into which it was projected. That it reached conclusions quite different from what the  ordinary uninstructed person would expect, added, I  suppose, to its intellectual prestige. That its teaching,  translated into practice, was austere and often unpalat-  able, lent it virtue. That it was adapted to carry a vast  and consistent logical superstructure, gave it beauty.  That it could explain much social injustice and apparent  cruelty as an inevitable incident in the scheme of pro-  gress, and the attempt to change such things as likely  on the whole to do more harm than good, commended  it to authority. That it afforded a measure of justifica-  tion to the free activities of the individual capitalist,  attracted to it the support of the dominant social force  behind authority. he celebrated optimism of traditional economic  theory, which has led to economists being looked upon  as Candides, who, having left this world for the culti-  vation of their gardens, teach that all is for the best in  the best of all possible worlds provided we will let well  alone, is also to be traced, I think, to their having  neglected to take account of the drag on prosperity  which can be exercised by an insufficiency of effective  demand.  
(Keynes - General Theory, p.54-5)

*The political rationale for the triumph of the Ricardian model - it's convenient for those in power*