Hoarding 10.10.20.19.41
========
@Marx @Monetary_Theory @Exchange @Value @Price @Circulation

##### Hoarding is a mechanism for managing the money supply - it allows the amount of commodity-money in circulation to change in response to the sum of prices/velocity

**This only works because the commodity-money can *congeal* as 'money', in addition to circulating as 'coin'**

> "So that money as coin may flow continuously, coin must continuously congeal into money. The continual movement of coin implies its perpetual stagnation in larger or smaller amounts in reserve funds of coin which arise everywhere within the framework of circula-tion and which are at the same time a condition of circulation. The formation, distribution, dissolution and re-formation of these funds constantly changes; existing funds disappear continuously and their disappearance is a continuous fact. This unceasing transformation of coin into money and of money into coin was expressed by Adam Smith when he said that, in addition to the particular commodity he sells, every commodity owner must always keep in stock a certain amount of the general commodity with which he buys. We have seen that  M—C, the second member of the circuit C—M—C, splits up into a series of purchases, which are not effected all at once but successively over a period of time, so that one part of  M circulates as coin, while the other part remains at rest as money. In this case, money is in fact only suspended  coin and the various component parts of the coinage in circulation appear, constantly changing, now in one form, now in another. The first transformation of the medium of circulation into money constitutes therefore merely a technical aspect of the circulation of money.*"
- ZK 360

*What form would contemporary hoarding take? The hoarding of oil? Gold? Forex?*


##### The appearance of exchange value in a permanent form - its fetishisation - means money becomes the object of all desire, a desire that is in tension with the needs of circulation

> "The passion for enrichment by contrast with the urge to acquire particular material wealth, i.e. use values, such as clothes, jewellery, herds of catde, etc., becomes possible only when general wealth as such is represented by a specific thing and can thus be retained as a particular commodity. Money therefore appears both as the object and the source of the desire for riches.* The underlying reason is in fact that exchange value as such becomes the goal, and consequently also an expansion of exchange value. Avarice clings to the hoard and does not allow money to become  a medium of circulation, but greed for gold preserves the monetary soul of the hoard and maintains it in constant tension with circulation."
- ZK 366

> "The activity which amasses hoards is, on the one hand, the withdrawal of money from circulation by constantly repeated sales, and, on the other, simple piling up,  accumulation. It is indeed only in the sphere of simple circulation, and specifically in the form of hoards, that accumulation of wealth as such takes place, whereas the other so-called forms of accumulation, as we shall see later, are quite improperly, and only by analogy with simple accumulation of money, regarded as accumulation. All other commodities are accumulated either as use values, and in this case the manner of their accumulation is determined by the specific features of their use value. Storing of corn, for example, requires special equip-ment; collecting sheep makes a person a shepherd; accumulation of slaves and land necessitates relations of domination and servitude, and so on. Unlike the simple act of piling up, the formation of stocks of particular types of wealth requires special methods and develops special traits in the individual. Or wealth in the shape of commodities may be accumulated as exchange value, and in this case accumulation becomes a commercial or specifically economic operation. The one concerned in it becomes a corn merchant, a cattle-dealer, and so forth. Gold and silver constitute money not as the result of any activity of the person who accumulates them, but as crystals of the process of circulation which takes place without his assistance. He need do nothing but put them aside, piling one lot upon another, a completely senseless activity, which if applied to any other commodity would result in its devaluation.*"

- ZK 366

##### Hoarding is more important in simple circulation

> "Our hoarder is a martyr to exchange value, a holy ascetic seated at the top of a metal column. He cares for wealth only in its social form, and accordingly he hides it away from society. He wants commodities in a form in which they can always circulate and he therefore withdraws them from circulation. He adores exchange value and he consequendy refrains from exchange. The liquid form of wealth and its petrification, the elixir of life and the philosophers' stone are wildly mixed together like an alchemist's apparitions. His imaginary boundless thirst for enjoyment causes him to renouce all enjoyment. Because he desires to satisfy all social requirements, he scarcely satisfies the most urgent physical wants. While clinging to wealth in its metallic corporeality the hoarder reduces it to a mere chimera. But the accumulation of money for the sake of money is in fact the barbaric form of production for the sake of production, i.e. the development of the productive powers of social labour beyond the limits of customary requirements. The less advanced is the production of com-modities, the more important is hoarding—the first form in which exchange value assumes an independent existence as money—and it therefore plays an important role among ancient nations, i n Asia u p to now, and among contemporary agrarian nations, where exchange value has not yet penetrated all relations of production."

- ZK 367

What does it mean to say that hoarding is more important in simple circulation? I don't understand this. What is simple v complex circulation? Or whatever the opposite of simple circulation is. Need to go back to KII for this.

His comparison of advanced bourgeois production with production in Asia and India indicates perhaps that in advanced/complex circulation hoarding occurs for the purpose of the never-ending loop of the generation of surplus value, rather than for the purpose simply of amassing a hoard.

##### Precious metals are used more as raw materials the more overall output increases, not as the price of precious metals falls

> "The fact that increasing wealth leads to an increased use of gold and silver in the form of luxury articles is such a simple matter that ancient thinkers clearly understood it,** whereas modern economists put forward the incorrect proposition that the use of silver and gold articles increases not in proportion to the rise in wealth but in proportion to the fall in the value of precious metals. There is therefore always a flaw in their otherwise accurate explanations regarding the use of Californian and Australian gold, for according to their views the increased employment of gold as raw material is not justified by a corresponding fall in its value. As a result of the fight between the American colonies and Spain7 6 and the interruption of mining by revolutions, the average annual output of precious metals decreased by more than one-half between 1810 and 1830. The amount of coin circulating in Europe decreased by almost one-sixth in 1829 as compared with 1809. Although the output thus decreased and the production costs (provided they changed at all) increased, nevertheless an exceptionally rapid rise in the use of precious metals as articles of luxury took place in England even during the war and on the continent following the Treaty of Paris.70 Their use increased with the growth of wealth in general."
- ZK 368