# The reserve fund

> The money   received from the commodity must therefore be constantly converted   back into these elements of productive capital, from the money form   into the commodity form. This is in no way changed by the fact that   raw materials and ancillaries may be bought at certain dates on a rela-  tively large scale, so that they form production reserves, and for a cer-  tain interval, therefore, these means of production do not need to be   bought anew; as long as they last, the money received from the sale of   the commodities can be collected, in so far as it serves this purpose, sand   this part of tLe constant capital temporarily appears as money capital   whose active function is suspended. The means of production must   always be renewed, even if the form of this renewal may differ, as far as   its circulation is concerned.
- KII 525

> It is there- fore the money form of a part of the constant capital value, of the fixed part of it. This hoard formation is therefore itself an element of the capitalist reproduction process, the reproduction and storage - in the money form - of the value of the fixed capital or its individual elements, until such a time as the fixed capital has expired and consequently sur- rendered the whole of its value to the commodities produced, when it has to be replaced in kind. This money, however, gives up its hoard form and again steps actively into the reproduction process of capital mediated by circulation only after it has been transformed back into new elements of fixed capital to replace the dead ones.
- KII 526

#question
_Does hoard formation subject the system to risk because it implies one-sided transactions that need to be balanced?_

#### The hoard itself is unproductive - it is a developing contradiction within capitalism that it is created and abhorred by capitalism
> If the surplus product directly produced and appropriated by the   capitalists A, A', A" (department I) is the real basis for capital accumu-  lation, i.e. for expanded reproduction, even though it actually functions   in this capacity only in the hands of B, B', B", etc. (department I), it is   however absolutely unproductive in its monetary metamorphosis - as a   hoard and as virtual money capital that is formed bit by bit. In this   form it runs parallel with the production process but lies outside it. It   is a 'dead weight' on capitalist production. The attempt to make use of   this surplus-value that is being hoarded up as virtual money capital,   either for profit or for revenue, culminates in the credit system and   'papers'. In this way money capital maintains an enormous influence   in another form on the course of the capitalist system of production and   its prodigious development.
- KII 573

The hoarded surplus is unproductive in its hoarded form. Use this as evidence of the contradictions involved in hoarding.


The tension of ebbs and flows over time and space