We are taught as children to conceive of money as the product of design. Early on we are told that 'money is money' because of social convention, implying some initial event of firm handshakes and steely-eyed aspirations for the future. When we go to school, and then university, we are taught a conceptual model of the fractional reserve banking system and the money mutliplier. These concepts are delivered to us outside of history - conceived as technical apparatuses complete in their own right. We come to believe that 'all of this' must be the product of design. That someone much smarter than us must have sat down at some point and worked all of this out, and, probably, that a group of similar people get together every year, review an annual report on the system, and agree to sensible, conservative, esoteric tweaks. If we're doing a postgraduate degree perhaps we will come to believe that this is what the Jackson Hole conference is.

This is all in contrast to the mounting evidence. Central banks, private banks and ratings agencies all openly state that economists do not understand how finance actually works.

The reality is that what we think of as the money/finance system is a product of historical evolution driven by a dialectic between the technology of production, and the limits historical financial systems have put on it.

A dialectic between production technology and financial systems.



Money coagulates into hoards. These hoards are used to fund capitalist production.
Hoards and velocity place limits on scale of production.

Fractional reserve banking system begins to overcome these.

Fractional reserve system can be undone by runs.

Clearinghouses reduce risk of runs.

